Interisland movements of woodland caribou in Newfoundland
================
Quinn M.R. Webber<sup>1\*</sup>, Jack G. Hendrix<sup>1</sup>, Alec L.
Robitaille<sup>2</sup>, Eric Vander Wal<sup>1,2</sup>
<sup>1</sup>Cognitive and Behavioural Ecology Interdisciplinary Program,
Memorial University of Newfoundland  
<sup>2</sup>Department of Biology, Memorial University of Newfoundland,
Canada  
\*Corresponding author: Quinn M.R. Webber (<webber.quinn@gmail.com>)

Caribou (*Rangifer tarandus*) are exceptional swimmers. Ample evidence
exists that caribou swim in streams, rivers, and lakes during migration
(Leblond et al. 2016) to avoid predators (Bergerud 1985) and access
islands during calving (Bergerud et al. 1990). Swimming for quadrupedal
terrestrial mammals can be thought of as a set of trade-offs. Costs
include high energy expenditure and risk of drowning. Specifically, even
though caribou are adept swimmers, the energetic expenditure associated
with swimming for quadrupedal mammals is significantly higher than
walking or running (Fish 1993). Additionally, drowning is also possible
(Miller & Gunn 1985) although the proportion of caribou that die from
drowning is unknown. Despite a large number of coastal and island
caribou herds, limited evidence exists suggesting that caribou swim in
the ocean as readily as they swim in freshwater (see Table 1). A key
exception is Peary caribou swimming up to 2.6 km between the Queen
Elizabeth Islands (Miller 1995; Miller 2002).

Here, we describe the visual observation of an adult male caribou
swimming between islands in the Fogo Island archipleago in the North
Atlantic Ocean. During routine fieldwork on May 30, 2017, we observed an
unmarked adult male caribou swim between Perry and Eastern Indian
Islands (Figure 1), a swim of at least 470 m which took ~9 minutes (~52
m per minute). This observation prompted us to query a large database of
GPS radio-collared caribou in the Fogo Island caribou herd in
Newfoundland, Canada. We identified 86 remotely sensed swimming events
between XX islands from three individual caribou over a three-year
period.

Caribou were introduced to Fogo Island (n = 26 animals introduced
between 1964–67) and Change Island (n = 5 animals introduced in 1964)
from the main Island of Newfoundland as part of a series of
translocations and introductions throughout the province (Bergerud &
Mercer 1989). While caribou populations are in decline throughout Canada
(Festa-Bianchet et al. 2011), as well as in Newfoundland
(Bastille-Rousseau et al. 2013), the Fogo Island herd has not declined
to the same extent and currently consists of approximately 300 animals
(Newfoundland and Labrador Wildlife Division, unpublished data). Since
2016 we have been studying the Fogo Island caribou herd (Bonar et
al. 2017; Bonar et al. 2018; Peignier et al. 2019). To date, we have
fitted XX adult female caribou with GPS collars (1240g, GPS 4400M; Lotek
Wireless Inc., Newmarket, Ontario, Canada), which were programmed to
collect relocation fixes every 2 hours (see Bonar et al. 2018 for
details).

We posit two potential mechanisms explaining the trade-offs associated
with swimming in the North Atlantic Ocean: forage limitation and the
associated density-dependent habitat selection and predator avoidance.
For caribou living on small islands in the ocean, the same notions for
why caribou swim in freshwater may also explain why caribou swim in the
ocean (Leblond et al. 2016). Specifically, forage limitation (Miller
2002) and predator avoidance (Jeffery et al. 2007) have been proposed as
potential explanations.

While caribou often swim across streams, rivers, and lakes (Leblond et
al. 2016), few observations exist of caribou swimming in the ocean (see
Table 1). Of the existing or inferred observations of caribou swimming
in the ocean, none appear to be as prolific as the number and frequency
of swimming events we observed. We surmise that for caribou living on
small islands, the primary drivers of swimming are likely related to
forage limitation and predator avoidance.

The Fogo Island archipelago is located in Newfoundland, Canada (49°N,
54°W), and comprises approximately ten islands. While Fogo Island is
the largest island (237.71 km<sup>2</sup>), the archipelago includes at
least three larger islands: Western Indian (77.6 km2), Eastern Indian
(38.7 km2) and Change (XX km2) Islands, as well as numerous smaller
islands, including Blundon’s (1.18 km2), North Long (1.01 km2), South
Long (0.48 km2), Kate’s (1.64 km2), and Brother’s (1.59 km2) Islands
(see Figure 1). All islands in the Fogo Island archipelago consist
largely of coniferous and mixed forests of balsam fir (Abies balsamea),
black spruce (Picea mariana), and white birch (Betula payrifera) as well
as bogs, lakes, lichen and rocky barrens.

In Newfoundland, wolves (Canis lupus) are extirpated, so coyotes (Canis
latrans) and black bears (Ursus americanus) are the primary predators of
caribou (Bastille-Rousseau et al. 2016). Coyotes and black bears are
responsible for the majority of mortalities for neonate caribou calves
(Bastille-Rousseau et al. 2016), although predation can still occur
after the calving period (Lewis & Mahoney 2014). However, on Fogo
Island, coyotes are the only predator of caribou.

Forage limitation could explain movement between islands. Forage
scarcity has been proposed as a potential reason why caribou move
between arctic islands on the sea-ice in winter (Miller et al. 1977).
For very small islands, over-grazing by newly arrived caribou may
rapidly limit forage (Bergerud et al. 1990). Without sea ice, movement
from the mainland to an island as well as between islands requires
caribou to assess the trade-off associated with swimming. The underlying
mechanism driving forage limitation and the trade-off associated with
swimming could be density-dependent habitat selection governed by the
Ideal Free Distribution (Morris 1987; Bradbury et al. 2015). Ideal Free
Distribution theory suggests that habitat selection is density-dependent
and that variation in density between habitat patches leads to a fitness
equilibrium (Bradbury et al. 2015). Fitness in a habitat patch depends
on density where, ideally, the available resources on a habitat patch
can sustain a specific number of individuals. In a hypothetical example,
when density of a given habitat patch has exceeded the fitness
equilibrium, animals are predicted to relocate and settle new habitat
patches to reach equilibrium. Islands therefore represent distinct
habitat patches with clear costs and benefits associated with swimming.

Woodland caribou are well known to disperse to remote locations,
including islands, during calving (Bergerud & Page 1987; Cumming &
Beange 1987). Moving to remote locations is a viable anti-predator
strategy for caribou because it reduces detection and encounter rates by
predators. For instance, the use of shoreline habitat in summer was
deemed an effective anti-predator calving strategy because caribou
avoided predators by using islands and peninsulas or swimming as a
flight response (Bergerud et al. 1990). The use of water, and by
association occasionally swimming, is therefore part of the fine-scale
interactions between caribou and their predators and the use of islands
appears to be an effective anti-predator strategy.

Forage limitation and over-grazing is a major issue for caribou
populations (Schaefer et al. 2016; Zamin et al. 2017). Reduced access to
foraging opportunities can result in higher conspecific competition for
resources and lowered reproductive success for adult females (Schaefer
et al. 2016). For caribou in the Fogo Island archipelago, the role of
forage limitation in animal habitat selection patterns and movement
remains unknown, but it is possible that forage limitation and increased
conspecific competition influences swimming between islands.

Caribou were introduced to Fogo Island in the 1960s and for several
decades the population did not exceed ~100 individuals (Bergerud &
Mercer 1989; Newfoundland and Labrador Wildlife Division, unpublished
data). During the 1990s, population density reached 300 animals and
anecdotal evidence suggests that caribou began to occupy other islands
in the archipelago. We surmise that, as density increased over time,
competition among conspecifics and density-dependent habitat selection
resulted in expansion of the population to nearby islands. Following
density-dependent habitat selection theory, caribou should swim to new
islands when the average fitness of individuals on the starting island
exceeds the density-fitness equilibrium (Morris 1987). Animals would
therefore be predicted to swim to new islands (i.e. settle new habitat
patches) to reach a fitness equilibrium. While this is an ultimate
explanation to a series of proximate observations, it is possible for
density-dependent habitat selection to operate at such a fine-scale
(Webber & Vander Wal 2018). Evidence from the Sable Island horse (Equus
ferus caballus) system corroborates our suggestion that swimming among
islands could be driven by density-dependent habitat selection (van
Beest et al. 2014). For horses, selection for high quality habitat was
highest when population density was low, but individuals tended to
settle in lower quality habitats as population density increased,
following Ideal Free Distribution theory (van Beest et al. 2014). Taken
together, caribou may follow density-dependent habitat selection
(Wittmer et al. 2007) and as population density increased, forage was
depleted and competition increased.

Predator avoidance could contribute to swimming behaviour of caribou in
our system as well as others (Miller 2002). Unlike elsewhere in the
range of caribou, wolves are extirpated from Newfoundland, including
Fogo Island. In Newfoundland, coyotes are the primary predator of
caribou (Bastille-Rousseau et al. 2016a). While predation by coyotes on
adult female caribou is possible, it is relatively rare on Fogo Island
(Webber & Vander Wal unpublished data). Therefore, any effect of
predation on swimming behaviour is likely related to fine-scale
encounters between coyotes and caribou which result in caribou swimming
as a flight response. Alternatively, during calving, females may swim to
small islands to give birth (Bergerud & Page 1987) or swim to islands
with a calf at heel to avoid predation. Swimming with a calf at heel has
been observed for caribou in freshwater lakes on Fogo Island (Webber &
Vander Wal unpublished data), so we anticipate it may also be possible
in the ocean. We suggest future studies assess encounter rates among
caribou and coyotes to determine what proportion of encounters result in
swimming behaviour.

Our observations represent the most frequent and numerous swimming
events for caribou in the ocean (for comparison see Table 1). While past
observations ( e.g. Miller 1995, 2002; Jeffery et al. 2007; Ricca et
al. 2012) have noted the unique nature of caribou swimming in the
ocean, we suggest that this behaviour is likely more common than
previously thought for caribou living on oceanic islands. We posit
forage limitation and density-dependent habitat selection is an ultimate
explanation for why caribou swimming in the ocean while predator
avoidance is a proximate explanation. Although our inference is limited
to observations, we suggest that because swimming behaviour is so common
in our system, that density-dependent habitat selection and predation
are plausible mechanisms explaining swimming behaviour in Fogo Island
caribou.

## Acknowledgements

We thank M. Laforge, M. Bonar, C. Hart, and R. Huang for help in the
field. Logistical support was provided L. Bixby. We also thank members
of the Newfoundland Wildlife Division including S. Moores, B. Adams, K.
Lewis, C. Doucet, W. Barney, F. Norman, R. Otto, J. Neville, P.
Saunders, T. Porter, P. Tremblett, S. Gullage, T. Hodder, D. Jennings,
J. McGinn, M. Frampton, P. McClement, and S. Mahoney for data
collection, management, and logistics. We thank T. Bergerud and S.
Mahoney for their vision in initiating much of the work on caribou in
Newfoundland. Funding for this study was provided by a National Sciences
and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) Vanier Canada Graduate
Scholarship to QMRW, NSERC Canda Graduate Scholarship to JGH, and a
NSERC Discovery Grant to EVW. We respectfully acknowledge the territory
in which data were collected and analyzed as the ancestral homelands of
the Beothuk, and the island of Newfoundland as the ancestral homelands
of the Mi’kmaq and Beothuk.

## Literature Cited
